Is there anything wrong with faith schools? 

In the previous assignment, it was discussed in how far indoctrination is a
necessary evil. In there, the issue of faith schooling had been touched
because those schools are often associated with the problem of indoctrination.
Within this essay, the focus will be on the question if there is something
wrong with faith schools. Therefore, the first section will outline a
definition of faith schools as a crucial base to answer the question. The
following parts will discuss different problems regarding faith schools before
giving a final answer to the question. 

Faith schools can be understood as ‘different kinds of schools […], […]
[which] are associated with a particular religion’ (Government, 2015, online).
Most of the faith schools are state-funded (Government, 2005) and around 33
per cent of all maintained schools are faith-based (Walford, 2010). Faith
schools follow the national curriculum but are free to focus only on one
religion in the religion classes. Additionally, they can have their own
admission requirements (Government, 2015). This definition given by the
UK Government is a more general one. The question remains unanswered where the
concrete differences are between faith schools and no-faith schools. For Hand
(2003) the difference exists in the additional mission of passing on religious
beliefs. He even goes so far to say that faith schools hold this mission per
definition. The faith schools which do not have the aim of passing on
religious beliefs, should not be called faith schools because they do not
fulfil the origin purpose of those schools. It can be questioned in how far
the only distinctive difference between religious and non-religious schools is
their religion mission. Maybe based on a different personal background to
Hand, for me, the differences between those types of schools can be seen in
their kind of funding. As a consequence they might have the aim to promote
their religion, but that is not a necessary requirement.	Compare the two given
definitions of faith schools it can be said that Hand (2003) has a more
theoretical/ philosophical/ transcendal/ heuristically approach which includes
a smaller number of schools in comparison to the more descriptive definition
made by the Government. 	In this essay, a more broaden term of faith schools
will be used which includes all kind of schools which are sponsored by a
religion organisation, which follow the national curriculum and which are
given the opportunity to only teach one religion. 	 

Try to answer the question arise a follow-up question: Should there be made a
distinction between faith schools with different religions? It can be assumed
that the values of a specific religion play a role in the daily school life.
This aspect will not be considered any further because the used definition of
faith schools also works (operates?) independently of a specific religion. At
the end of this essay is has to be judged if it is necessary to distinguish
between different types of faiths. 

As mentioned above, one problem of faith schools is the accusation that they
are indoctrinatory. Michael Hand is a strong advocate of this accusation. His
argumentation covers four premises which concludes that ‘faith schools are,
when successful, indoctrinatory’ (Hand, 2004, p. 343) and therefore should be
abolished. This argumentation is based on the premise that the distinctive aim
of faith schools is the mission of passion on religious beliefs. Accepting
this premise, his argumentation is logically correct: School which promote
indoctrination should be abolished. This argumentation also works for the used
definition IF the aim of a faith school is to pass on their own (and only)
religious belief. 		But what is possibly wrong with those school which do
not have the aim of pass on a specific religious belief? Referring back to the
definition above, those schools exist. In my opinion there are also other
arguments which express the problem with those schools. 	

One aspect is the question of social cohesion. After the riots in 2001 the
Home Office instituted the Independent Review Team (IRT) chaired by Ted Cantle
(2001) to do some research about the factors influencing social and community
cohesion. So far, there is no clear evidence that faith schools cause social
division. But, through following the argumentation given by the IRT (2001) or
the Runnymede Trust (2008), there is a connection between faith schools and
social cohesion because of the following argumentation: Parents send their
children to faith schools because they live in the catchment area or because
they want their child to be educated (not indoctrinated) in their religion.
Especially, but not only, the latter reason cause a quite homogeny group of
pupils with one religion. The pupils do not have contact to children with
other religions or values. How can pupils build real tolerance and awareness
if they are staying in a homogeny group regarding religion and values? I
support the opinion that it is not possible to learn this things by being
taught. And as an additional aspect pointed out by Hand (2003): To teach
something does not mean to learn something or to come to know something. 

Another problem with not indoctrinatory faith schools can be recognised by
changing the viewpoint and having a look from the perspective of pupils.
Pupils who visit faith schools which only promote one religion are narrowed
down regarding their knowledge about other religions. Furthermore, they do not
have the chance to choose a religion because of the missing knowledge. This
could create a form of religious ignorance towards other religious. A weakness
of this argument, however, is the problem that it cannot be said in how far
children with religious parents are in general able to choose a religion. But
nevertheless it has to be taken in account that the problem of restricted
knowledge exists. 	

After pointing out the problems arise with faith schools, it should be shortly
having a look at the supposed to be positive aspect of faith schools. Some
authors (XXXXX) argue that pupils from faith schools are better qualified in
comparison to pupils who did not visit those schools. It as to be said that
there is inconsistent research for this argumentation. If this was true, it
would have to be analysed which are the concrete reasons: the predominated
religion with its values or maybe the more money that is invested in those
schools by the religions organisation. If the former aspect were the case, the
question would be if it apply for all religions because their values could be
quite different. If the latter aspect is the case, this supposedly argument
for religious schools can be diminished by giving more money to non-faith
schools.  	

Returning to the question posed at the beginning of this essay it is now
possible to say that there are propositions which underpin that there is
something wrong with faith schools. But the argumentation is not only based on
the fact that faith schools are indoctrinatory, as argued by Hand (2003), but
also faith schools in general are prone to create social division and
intolerance towards other religions and cultures. BUT is should have become
clear that those objections do not automatically count for all faith schools.
This conclusion request the possibility to measure in how far individual faith
schools try to indoctrinate and creates social division. Even though different
schools are all subsume as faith schools does not mean that they work in the
same way even though it would make this discussion fare more simple.
Thinking about the topic for another essay, it would be interesting to
try……..GOOD QUESTION ? 



Brighouse, H. (2006) On Edcuation. London: Routledge

Hand, M. (2003) A philosophical Objection to Faith Schools. Theory and Research in Education, 1 (1), 89–99. 

Hand, M. (2004) The problem with faith schools. A reply to my critics. Theory and Research, 2 (3), 343-353.

Government (2015) Types of schools – Faith schools [online]. Available from https://www.gov.uk/types-of-	school/faith-schools [Accessed 20.4.2015] 

Independent Review Team (2001) Community Cohesion: A report of the Independent 		Review Team. Chaired by Ted Cantle. London: Home Office

Runnymede Trust (2008) Right to divide [online]. Available from	 	http://www.runnymedetrust.org/uploads/publications/pdfs/RightToDivide-2008.pdf 	[Accessed 15th April 2015] 	
Walford, G. (2010) Faith schools and community cohesion. In Grimmitt, M. (ed.) 	Religious 	education and social and community cohesion: An exploration of challenges and 	opportunities, pp. 88-XXXX. Great Warkering: McCrimmon. 



